the 76th jpmorgan asset management round
the island race took place on Saturday
23rd of June as dawn broke more than
10,000 people sailing on nearly 1,800
boats were preparing for the 55 mile
course which started and finished off
cows a westerly breeze of 10 knots meant
it was going to be a beat down to the
needles and with forecasts predicting
the wind building to 15 to 20 knots
there was a growing expectation that
this year was going to be a fast race
the star Purfleet one got underway at
5am with broadcaster and writer alan
titchmarsh barring the first cannon from
the Royal Yacht Squadron Mike Slade's
100-foot Maxie icap leopard immediately
took the lead and soon left the rest of
a fleet in its wake this first group of
starters included for open 60s 30 group
0 yachts and 9 clipper 68 Artemis ocean
racing led the open sixties but dekhe
far is Aviva was doing well on the
island side of the channel sir robin
knox Johnson's Lombard marine finance
was sailing under new livery having
recently returned from a grueling velux
five oceans race
a vast range of craft including sports
boats cruisers multihulls maxi yachts
and classic yachts can enter the round
the island race the entries are divided
into a number of groups which are in
turn subdivided into a number of
divisions these are then arranged in 11
fleets which started at 10-minute
intervals from 5am until 6 40 the bulk
of a fleet sail under IRC handicap and
each yacht is a fighting chance of
winning the prestigious overall prizes
by 530i cap leopard was off newtown
beating into the 10 to 12 not westerly
breeze and barely 15 minutes later she
was storming through her snare ohs
at five-fifty fleet six was starting
comprising more than 200 yachts by now
the start sequence was over halfway
through with six of the eleventh fleet
started and on their way
meanwhile leopard was out on her own
setting pastor shingles bank on the
approach to the needles
at six-fifteen leopard rounded the
needles and headed to st. Catherine's on
a broad reach reporting speeds of 19 to
20 knots like her predecessors this far
design super maxi his aim tools for
charter market as well as winning races
and making record attempts with her
removable interior she can be
transformed from racing machine to a
luxurious charter yacht the first two
extreme 40s were not far behind with JP
Morgan Asset Management an ABN amro
rounding the needles at six-twenty
within 50 yards of each other the
optional challenges team extreme 40
skippered by Nick Maloney lost a man
overboard team manager Charles
Derbyshire was quickly picked up by
their support rib and was soon back on
board the incident would disqualify them
from the race but they carried on to the
finish in full race mode at six thirty
four pounder was the second mana whole
round the needles with the tp52 panthera
next followed by the volvo sixty project
and the tp52 red Artemis was the first
open 62 ramo needles with a Viva second
and Lombard marine finance lying third
pair of Britain got into a big tangle of
the needles when she dropped a spinnaker
in the water shredding it in the process
she lost a lot of ground as a result
losing half a mile to her sister ship
Cherokee to meanwhile the extreme 40
basilica was forced to retire due to
gear failure the three remaining extreme
forces stormed on toward st. Catharines
in hot pursuit of leopard the boats were
doing more than 20 knots through the
four to six foot swells making for some
extremely lively sailing shortly after
seven o'clock but first of the small
multihulls rounded the needles at 709
leopard was at st. Catherine's having
stayed close inshore she approached the
point
the extreme fort is however headed more
than a mile and a half off shore before
jiving and heading back towards the
island under there a symmetrix leopard
was a magnificent sight as she sailed on
a spinnaker reach close inshore giving
the spectators a real treat at st.
Catherine's an ventnor back at the
needles boats of all shapes sizes and
ages were jostling for position by
seven-thirty double gold medallist
Shirley Robertson had rounded in her Jay
80 shortly after her came the first
hunter 707s and so nars the open sixty
Artemis was the second place monohull at
this time passing st. Catharines at
about 7 45 closely pursued by bounder in
third place skippered by Johnny
Melbourne Artemis was having an
excellent race making massive gains by
choosing to go well offshore rather than
jibe along the island coast little did
anyone know at the time that bounder the
brand-new 55 foot yacht owned by Chris
little would encounter disaster a week
later when she lost her key laughs and
Catherine's capsized and had to be
abandoned just before 8am the yacht
malice hit the wreck of the valve assy
at the needles but later reported she
was ok